[DOC]Add new dot expander processor doc (#5631)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _ingest-pipelines/processors/dot-expander.md

---
layout: default
title: Dot expander
parent: Ingest processors
nav_order: 65
---

# Dot expander 

The `dot_expander` processor transforms fields containing dots into object fields, making them accessible to other processors in the pipeline. Without this transformation, fields with dots cannot be processed.

> The following is the syntax for the `date_index_name` processor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is the syntax for the `dot_expander` processor:
```

`override` | Optional | The field determines how the processor handles conflicts when expanding a field that overlaps with an existing nested object. Setting `override` to `false` instructs the processor to merge the conflicting values into an array, preserving both the original and expanded values. Conversely, setting `override` to `true` causes the processor to replace the existing nested object's value with the expanded field's value. |
`description`  | Optional  | A brief description of the processor. |
`if` | Optional | A condition for running this processor. |
`ignore_failure` | Optional | If set to `true`, failures are ignored. Default is `false`. |
`on_failure` | Optional | A list of processors to run if the processor fails. |
`tag` | Optional | An identifier tag for the processor. Useful for debugging to distinguish between processors of the same type. |

## Using the processor

Follow these steps to use the processor in a pipeline.

> **Step 1: Create a pipeline.**

Reviewer: Global: I would consider making these an H3 header, so that the steps stand out more and there's a header level in between the *H4* response headers.

```suggestion
### Step 1: Create a pipeline
```

{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_index": "testindex1",
      "_id": "1",
      "_source": {
        "field": "city, state"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### Response

The following example response confirms that the pipeline is working as expected:

```json
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "doc": {
        "_index": "testindex1",
        "_id": "1",
        "_source": {
          "field": "city, state"
        },
        "_ingest": {
          "timestamp": "2023-11-17T23:49:27.597933805Z"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

**Step 3: Ingest a document.**

The following query ingests a document into an index named `testindex1`:

```json
PUT testindex1/_doc/1?pipeline=dot-expander
{
  "field": "Denver, CO"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

**Step 4 (Optional): Retrieve the document.**

To retrieve the document, run the following query:

```json
GET testindex1/_doc/1
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### Response

The following response confirms the document was indexed:

```json
{
  "_index": "testindex1",
  "_id": "1",
  "_version": 58,
  "_seq_no": 57,
  "_primary_term": 30,
  "found": true,
  "_source": {
    "field": "Denver, CO"
  }
}
```

## Nested fields

> The processor consolidates the `user.address.city` and `user.address.state` fields by merging with an existing `address`, `city`, and `state` field nested under `user`. If the field is a scalar value, then it will turn that into an array field. Take for example the following document:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dot_expander` processor consolidates the `user.address.city` and `user.address.state` fields by merging with an existing `address`, `city`, and `state` field nested under `user`. If the field is a scalar value, then it will turn that field into an array. Take for example the following document:
```

```json
{
    "dot_expander": {
        "field": "user.address.city",
        "override": true
    }
}
```

With `override:false` (or unset), the dot-pathed top-level field gets appended to the target object node, so it transforms into:

```json
{
   "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": ["Denver", "Boulder"],
            "state": "CO"
        }
    }
}
```

With `override:true`, the dot-pathed top-level field value overwrites the target object node, so it transforms into:

```json
{
   "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": "Boulder",
            "state": "CO"
        }
    }
}
```

If the field value is set to a wildcard `*`, the processor expands all top-level dotted field names, for example:  

```json
{
    "dot_expander": {
        "field": "*"
    }
}
```

> Take for example the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take for example the following document:
```

```json
{
    "user.address.city": "Denver",
    "user.address.state": "CO"
}
```

> The `dot_expander` processor transforms that document into the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dot_expander` processor transforms that document into the following fields, all nested under user:
```

```json
{
    "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": "Denver"
        }
    },
    "user": {
        "address": {
            "state": "CO"
        }
    }
}
```

> If the field is nested within a structure without dots, use the `path` parameter to navigate the non-dotted structure, for example:

Reviewer: What do you mean by "navigate"?

Reviewer: I would also clarify that while the nested field at the top layer doesn't have dots, the fields nest beneath them, for example `city.one`, do. So `dot_expander` will take the dotted fields nested underneath the non-dotted field and turns them into an array?

```json
{
    "dot_expander": {
        "path": "user.address",
        "field": "*"
    }
}
```

Take for example the following document: 

```json
{
    "user": {
        "address": {
            "city.one": "Denver",
            "city.two": "Houston",
            "state.one": "CO",
            "state.two": "TX"
        }
    }
}
```

The `dot_expander` processor transforms the document into:

```json
{
    "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": {
                "one": "Denver",
                "two": "Houston"
            },
            "state": {
                "one": "CO",
                "two": "TX"
            }
        } 
    }
}
```

To ensure proper expansion of the `user.address.city` and `user.address.state` fields and handle conflicts with pre-existing fields, use a similar configuration as the following document: 

> ```json

Reviewer: Would you configure your documents like the following example or add this to your ingest pipeline?

---
layout: default
title: Dot expander
parent: Ingest processors
nav_order: 65
---

# Dot expander 

The `dot_expander` processor is a tool that helps you work with hierarchical data. It transforms fields containing dots into object fields, making them accessible to other processors in the pipeline. Without this transformation, fields with dots cannot be processed.

The following is the syntax for the `dot_expander` processor:

```json
{
  "dot_expander": {
    "field": "field.to.expand" 
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Configuration parameters

The following table lists the required and optional parameters for the `dot_expander` processor.

Parameter | Required/Optional | Description |
|-----------|-----------|-----------|

> `field`  | Required  | The field to expand into an object field. If set to `*`, all top-level fields will be expanded. |

Reviewer 2: Please remove `*`. It's not supported.

`path` | Optional | The field is only required if the field to be expanded is nested within another object field. This is because the `field` parameter only recognizes leaf fields, which are fields that are not nested within any other objects. |

> `override` | Optional | The field determines how the processor handles conflicts when expanding a field that overlaps with an existing nested object. Setting `override` to `false` instructs the processor to merge the conflicting values into an array, preserving both the original and expanded values. Conversely, setting `override` to `true` causes the processor to replace the existing nested object's value with the expanded field's value. |

Reviewer 2: Please remove `override`. It is not supported in OpenSearch.

`description`  | Optional  | A brief description of the processor. |
`if` | Optional | A condition for running this processor. |
`ignore_failure` | Optional | If set to `true`, failures are ignored. Default is `false`. |
`on_failure` | Optional | A list of processors to run if the processor fails. |
`tag` | Optional | An identifier tag for the processor. Useful for debugging to distinguish between processors of the same type. |

## Using the processor

Follow these steps to use the processor in a pipeline.

### Step 1: Create a pipeline

> The following query expands two fields named `user.address.city` and `user.address.state` into nested objects named `city` and `state`: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following query creates a dot expander processor that will expand two fields named `user.address.city` and `user.address.state` into nested objects: 
```

```json

> PUT /_ingest/pipeline/dot-expander

Reviewer 2: Could you fix alignment on this?

{
  "description": "Dot expander processor",
  "processors": [
    {
      "dot_expander": {
        "field": "user.address.city"
      }
    },
    {
        "dot_expander":{
         "field": "user.address.state"
        }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Step 2 (Optional): Test the pipeline

It is recommended that you test your pipeline before you ingest documents.
{: .tip}

To test the pipeline, run the following query:

> ```json

Reviewer 2: You need to test the pipeline using the fields that you set up in the processor:

```
POST _ingest/pipeline/dot-expander/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_index": "testindex1",
      "_id": "1",
      "_source": {
        "user.address.city": "New York",
        "user.address.state": "NY"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

POST _ingest/pipeline/dot-expander/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_index": "testindex1",
      "_id": "1",
      "_source": {
        "field": "city, state"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### Response

> The following example response confirms that the pipeline is working as expected:

Reviewer 2: Here is the response. Please change:

```
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "doc": {
        "_index": "testindex1",
        "_id": "1",
        "_source": {
          "user": {
            "address": {
              "city": "New York",
              "state": "NY"
            }
          }
        },
        "_ingest": {
          "timestamp": "2023-12-22T19:31:16.494688797Z"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

```json
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "doc": {
        "_index": "testindex1",
        "_id": "1",
        "_source": {
          "field": "city, state"
        },
        "_ingest": {
          "timestamp": "2023-11-17T23:49:27.597933805Z"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Step 3: Ingest a document

The following query ingests a document into an index named `testindex1`:

> ```json

Reviewer 2: You need to pass a field that you set up. Please change to:

```
PUT testindex1/_doc/1?pipeline=dot-expander
{
  "user.address.city": "Denver",
  "user.address.state": "CO"
}
```

PUT testindex1/_doc/1?pipeline=dot-expander
{
  "field": "Denver, CO"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Step 4 (Optional): Retrieve the document

To retrieve the document, run the following query:

```json
GET testindex1/_doc/1
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### Response

> The following response confirms the document was indexed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following response confirms that the specified fields were expanded into nested fields:
```

> ```json

Reviewer 2: Here is the response. Please change to:

```
{
  "_index": "testindex1",
  "_id": "1",
  "_version": 1,
  "_seq_no": 0,
  "_primary_term": 1,
  "found": true,
  "_source": {
    "user": {
      "address": {
        "city": "Denver",
        "state": "CO"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Author: Added example

{
  "_index": "testindex1",
  "_id": "1",
  "_version": 58,
  "_seq_no": 57,
  "_primary_term": 30,
  "found": true,
  "_source": {
    "field": "Denver, CO"
  }
}
```

## Nested fields

The `dot_expander` processor consolidates the `user.address.city` and `user.address.state` fields by merging with an existing `address`, `city`, and `state` field nested under `user`. If the field is a scalar value, then it will turn that field into an array. Take for example the following document:

> ```json

Reviewer 2: Please remove. OpenSearch does not support the `override` parameter.

Author: Removed

{
    "dot_expander": {
        "field": "user.address.city",
        "override": true
    }
}
```

With `override:false` (or unset), the dot-pathed top-level field gets appended to the target object node, so it transforms into:

```json
{
   "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": ["Denver", "Boulder"],
            "state": "CO"
        }
    }
}
```

With `override:true`, the dot-pathed top-level field value overwrites the target object node, so it transforms into:

```json
{
   "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": "Boulder",
            "state": "CO"
        }
    }
}
```

> If the field value is set to a wildcard `*`, the processor expands all top-level dotted field names, for example:  

Reviewer 2: Please remove. OpenSearch does not support wildcards in field names.

Author: Removed

```json
{
    "dot_expander": {
        "field": "*"
    }
}
```

Take for example the following document:

```json
{
    "user.address.city": "Denver",
    "user.address.state": "CO"
}
```

The `dot_expander` processor transforms that document into the following fields, all nested under `user`:

```json
{
    "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": "Denver"
        }
    },
    "user": {
        "address": {
            "state": "CO"
        }
    }
}
```

If a field is nested within a structure without dots, you can use the `path` parameter to traverse the non-dotted structure. For example, if you have the field `user.address`, you can use the `dot_expander processor` to expand it into an object field named `user` with a nested field named `address`, as shown in the following example: 

> ```json

Reviewer 2: Please specify the actual field names. Wildcards are not supported. Also, this is better to have as a complete request, not part of a document, so users can run the examples.

Author: @msfroh Please see the preceding and following comments. Will you or your team provide a relevant OpenSearch example?

{
    "dot_expander": {
        "path": "user.address",
        "field": "*"
    }
}
```

Then take for example the following document: 

> ```json

Reviewer 2: What do "one" and "two" show in this example? Would it be better to have "user" as path and "address.city" and "address.state" as fields?

{
    "user": {
        "address": {
            "city.one": "Denver",
            "city.two": "Houston",
            "state.one": "CO",
            "state.two": "TX"
        }
    }
}
```

The `dot_expander` processor transforms the document into:

```json
{
    "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": {
                "one": "Denver",
                "two": "Houston"
            },
            "state": {
                "one": "CO",
                "two": "TX"
            }
        } 
    }
}
```

> To ensure proper expansion of the `user.address.city` and `user.address.state` fields and handle conflicts with pre-existing fields, use a similar configuration as the following document: 

Reviewer 2: We need an example with an actual conflict to illustrate how conflicts are handled. First, an example of a simple document with a conflict, and next, an example with rename. Let me know if I can help with examples.

```json
PUT /_ingest/pipeline/dot-expander
{
  "description": "Dot expander processor",
  "processors": [
    {
      "dot_expander": {
        "field": "user.address.city"
      }
    },
    {
        "dot_expander":{
         "field": "user.address.state"
        }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

**Step 2 (Optional): Test the pipeline.**

It is recommended that you test your pipeline before you ingest documents.
{: .tip}

To test the pipeline, run the following query:

```json
POST _ingest/pipeline/dot-expander/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_index": "testindex1",
      "_id": "1",
      "_source": {
        "field": "city, state"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### Response

The following example response confirms that the pipeline is working as expected:

```json
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "doc": {
        "_index": "testindex1",
        "_id": "1",
        "_source": {
          "field": "city, state"
        },
        "_ingest": {
          "timestamp": "2023-11-17T23:49:27.597933805Z"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: This example doesn't flex the dot-expander -- the source doesn't get transformed.

A better example would be an example like:

```json
POST _ingest/pipeline/dot-expander/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_index": "testindex1",
      "_id": "1",
      "_source": {
        "user.address.city": "Seattle",
        "user.address.state": "Washington" 
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

which should expand out into:

```json
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "doc": {
        "_index": "testindex1",
        "_id": "1",
        "_source": {
          "user" : {
            "address": {
              "city": "Seattle",
              "state": "Washington"
            }
          }
        },
        "_ingest": {
          "timestamp": "2023-11-17T23:49:27.597933805Z"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

  }
}
```

## Nested fields

The processor consolidates the `user.address.city` and `user.address.state` fields by merging with an existing `address`, `city`, and `state` field nested under `user`. If the field is a scalar value, then it will turn that into an array field. Take for example the following document:

```json
{
    "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": "Denver",
            "state": "CO"
        }
    }
}
```

The `dot_expander` processor transforms the individual fields into arrays as follows:

```json
{
    "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": ["Denver"],
            "state": ["CO"]
        }
    }
}
```

If you set the `override` parameter to `true`, the value of the expanded field overrides the value of the nested object. Take for example the following configuration:

```json
{
    "dot_expander": {
        "field": "user.address.city",
        "override": true
    }
}
```

The result is the following document, in which the expanded field `user.address.city` overrides the value of the nested object `user.address`:

```json
{
    "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": "Denver",
            "state": "CO"
        }
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: A better example would be an input like:

```
{
  "user.address.city": "Boulder",
   "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": "Denver",
            "state": "CO"
        }
    }
}
```

With `override:false` (or unset), the dot-pathed top-level field gets appended to the target object node, so it transforms into:

```
{
   "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": ["Denver", "Boulder"],
            "state": "CO"
        }
    }
}
```

With `override:true`, the dot-pathed top-level field value overwrites the target object node, so it transforms into:

```
{
   "user": {
        "address": {
            "city": "Boulder",
            "state": "CO"
        }
    }
}
```

---
layout: default
title: Dot expander
parent: Ingest processors
nav_order: 65
---

# Dot expander 

The `dot_expander` processor is a tool that helps you work with hierarchical data. It transforms fields containing dots into object fields, making them accessible to other processors in the pipeline. Without this transformation, fields with dots cannot be processed.

The following is the syntax for the `dot_expander` processor:

```json
{
  "dot_expander": {
    "field": "field.to.expand" 
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Configuration parameters

The following table lists the required and optional parameters for the `dot_expander` processor.

Parameter | Required/Optional | Description |
|-----------|-----------|-----------|

> `field`  | Required  | The field to expand into an object field. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`field`  | Required  | The field to be expanded into an object field. |
```

> `path` | Optional | The field is only required if the field to be expanded is nested within another object field. This is because the `field` parameter only recognizes leaf fields. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`path` | Optional | This field is only required if the field to be expanded is nested within another object field. This is because the `field` parameter only recognizes leaf fields. |
```

`description`  | Optional  | A brief description of the processor. |

> `if` | Optional | A condition for running this processor. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`if` | Optional | A condition for running the processor. |
```

`ignore_failure` | Optional | If set to `true`, failures are ignored. Default is `false`. |
`on_failure` | Optional | A list of processors to run if the processor fails. |

> `tag` | Optional | An identifier tag for the processor. Useful for debugging to distinguish between processors of the same type. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`tag` | Optional | An identifier tag for the processor. Useful for debugging in order to distinguish between processors of the same type. |
```

```json
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "doc": {
        "_index": "testindex1",
        "_id": "1",
        "_source": {
          "user": {
            "address": {
              "city": "New York",
              "state": "NY"
            }
          }
        },
        "_ingest": {
          "timestamp": "2024-01-17T01:32:56.501346717Z"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### Step 3: Ingest a document

The following query ingests a document into an index named `testindex1`:

```json
PUT testindex1/_doc/1?pipeline=dot-expander-pipeline
{
  "user.address.city": "Denver",
  "user.address.state": "CO"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Step 4 (Optional): Retrieve the document

To retrieve the document, run the following query:

```json
GET testindex1/_doc/1
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### Response

The following response confirms that the specified fields were expanded into nested fields:

```json
{
  "_index": "testindex1",
  "_id": "1",
  "_version": 1,
  "_seq_no": 3,
  "_primary_term": 1,
  "found": true,
  "_source": {
    "user": {
      "address": {
        "city": "Denver",
        "state": "CO"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## The `path` parameter

> You can use the `path` parameter to specify the path to a dotted field within an object. For example, the following pipeline specifies the `address.city` field that is located within `user` object: 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can use the `path` parameter to specify the path to a dotted field within an object. For example, the following pipeline specifies the `address.city` field that is located within the `user` object: 
```

```json
PUT /_ingest/pipeline/dot-expander-pipeline
{
  "description": "Dot expander processor",
  "processors": [
    {
      "dot_expander": {
        "field": "address.city",
        "path": "user"
      }
    },
    {
      "dot_expander":{
       "field": "address.state",
       "path": "user"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Simulate the pipeline as follows: 

Reviewer 4: "You can simulate..."?

```json
POST _ingest/pipeline/dot-expander-pipeline/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_index": "testindex1",
      "_id": "1",
      "_source": {
        "user": {
          "address.city": "New York",
          "address.state": "NY"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The `dot_expander` processor transforms the document into:

Reviewer 4: "into the following [noun]"?

> The `dot_expander` processor transforms the document into:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `dot_expander` processor transforms the document into the following:
```

```json
{
  "user": {
    "address": {
      "city": "New York",
      "state": "NY"
    }
  }
}
```

## Field name conflicts

> If there already exists a field with the same path as the path where the `dot_expander` processor should expand the value, the processor merges the two values into an array.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If a field already exists that has the same path as the path where the `dot_expander` processor should expand the value, the processor merges the two values into an array.
```

> If there already exists a field with the same path as the path where the `dot_expander` processor should expand the value, the processor merges the two values into an array.

Reviewer 4: Should "where" be "to which"? Unsure of this one.

Author: Revised

Consider the following pipeline that expands the field `user.name`:

```json
PUT /_ingest/pipeline/dot-expander-pipeline
{
  "description": "Dot expander processor",
  "processors": [
    {
      "dot_expander": {
        "field": "user.name"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Simulate the pipeline with a document where there are two values with the exact same path `user.name`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Simulate the pipeline with a document containing two values with the exact same path `user.name`:
```

> Simulate the pipeline with a document where there are two values with the exact same path `user.name`:

Reviewer 4: "You can simulate..."?

```json
POST _ingest/pipeline/dot-expander-pipeline/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_index": "testindex1",
      "_id": "1",
      "_source": {
        "user.name": "John", 
        "user": {
          "name": "Steve"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The response shows that the values were merged into an array:

Reviewer 4: "indicates" instead of "shows"? (optional suggestion)

```json
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "doc": {
        "_index": "testindex1",
        "_id": "1",
        "_source": {
          "user": {
            "name": [
              "Steve",
              "John"
            ]
          }
        },
        "_ingest": {
          "timestamp": "2024-01-17T01:44:57.420220551Z"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

> If there is a field name with a same name but a different path field needs to be renamed. For example, the following simulate call returns a parse exception:

Reviewer 4: "If a field contains the same name but a different path, then the field needs to be renamed"?

> If a field contains the same name but a different path, then the field needs to be renamed. For example, the following simulate call returns a parse exception:

Reviewer 4: Should "simulate" be in code font (my brain wants to incorrectly change it to "simulated")?

```json
POST _ingest/pipeline/dot-expander-pipeline/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_index": "testindex1",
      "_id": "1",
      "_source": {
        "user": "John",
        "user.name": "Steve"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

> To avoid the parse exception, rename the field first using the `rename` processor:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To avoid the parse exception, first rename the field by using the `rename` processor:
```

```json
PUT /_ingest/pipeline/dot-expander-pipeline
{
  "processors" : [
    {
      "rename" : {
        "field" : "user",
        "target_field" : "user.name"
      }
    },
    {
      "dot_expander": {
        "field": "user.name"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Now simulate the pipeline:

Reviewer 4: "Now you can simulate the pipeline"?

```json
POST _ingest/pipeline/dot-expander-pipeline/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_index": "testindex1",
      "_id": "1",
      "_source": {
        "user": "John",
        "user.name": "Steve"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The response confirms that the fields are merged:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The response confirms that the fields were merged:
```
